and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth show i'm your host
sam dunning co-owner over at
webwithsupa.com
if you haven't yet check out our weekly
email where we share actual tips
podcast bonus resources and much much
more every monday to start your week off
with a bang you can sign up over at
business growth
dot email
joining me today is returning guests and
without inflating his ego too much he's
probably one of the most viewed and
downloaded episodes that we've had since
he's been on recently we've had him on
sharing best practices for demos working
inbound leads but it is benjamin dennehy
the uk's most hated sales trainer
benjamin welcome back sir
hello sam thanks for getting me back now
i only discovered yesterday why i'm the
most downloaded it turns out that the
kiwi accent is the sexiest accent in the
world oh really yeah
but i struggle to believe that one but
uh hey that could explain why it was so
popular there we go you and you didn't
write that article did you
no no
funnily enough it wasn't my pr team that
did
it there we go there we go good stuff so
today we're going to be sharing uh call
to close so from an issue of cool right
through to closing and winning a deal a
sales master class we're going to go
through some best practices actionable
tips across each stage right from
initial calls through to winning or not
winning you're losing deals so let's
jump straight into it sir okay i want to
um i want to start from the very start
so from initial cold call
what is the um what's the reason for it
what are we trying to achieve
what are we trying to get out of a cold
call
so that's a good question see i ask
everybody that question what is the
purpose
of a cold call
and you get an array of answers and you
get things like well to get an
appointment
to find pain
uh to understand need uh to gather
information you get all these
answers like this and nobody ever gets
the real answer and i say look those are
all good answers but everything you've
just given me is an outcome
right gathering information is an
outcome finding pain
is an outcome getting an appointment is
an outcome
outcomes are different from purpose
if you ask a lawyer what's the purpose
of a trial they wouldn't say to get an
acquittal
to get a conviction no no no those are
outcomes
what's the purpose of then they give you
the fancy while they're all about the
administration of justice and the
impartial hearing
that's the purpose but it's got multiple
outcomes so what is the purpose of
prospecting the purpose of prospecting
is to get a human being emotional about
whatever it is that you fix
so i'm phoning up a stranger
he's sitting in his desk happy as larry
eating a sandwich egg and cress
no no not a care in the world at this
moment in time and then i phone up
and i just talk about the three biggest
things that i typically help my clients
fix
and he either says nah i don't recognize
any of those or he says no no i can
relate to some of those and then in the
space of about six to seven questions i
move him from intellectually
acknowledging it to feeling it slightly
i'm not talking blood and guts on the
table or the man breaking down an
emotional [__] right i'm talking
where he gets to the point where he says
you know what
it does kind of piss me off or it does
frustrate me or it does annoy me
and then he said all right maybe we
should continue the conversation that is
it a good prospecting call lasts
anywhere from six to eight minutes
anything longer than that and you've
moved into the realm of trying to sell
them or you're waffling and the problem
with
most sales people on a prospecting call
is they do the crab walk they tend to go
sideways
they're not pushing a person from
intellect to emotion and you can have
great sideways conversation you could
talk to somebody for 20 minutes
intellectually
and get to the end of it and they say
well look i've enjoyed the chat but i
don't feel there's anything here it's
because they've done nothing to move the
person from intellect to emotion so the
purpose of a prospecting call is to get
someone emotional about whatever it is
that you fix and you can't get everyone
emotional because some people won't have
them they won't recognize them they
won't relate to them
they don't care about them so it's not
and that's the other thing prospecting
calls aren't about getting everybody
to say yes they're about finding the
right people to say yes because i don't
want to be kissing frogs
i want to be kissing princesses so i've
got to find the princesses amongst the
frogs they're there but there's only a
few of them
yeah well that's about it that's what
we're trying to do on a prospecting call
nicely done so in terms of um
moving people from intellect to emotion
why is it so important ben to get people
emotional what's because we bother
mutually
and we justify intellectually
so it doesn't matter how intellectually
brilliant my solution is if i don't feel
if the prospect doesn't feel they need
it then why would they do it so for
instance i i i've got um like everyone i
have a mobile phone or a cell phone if
you're watching in america or the
colonies yeah so you've got a cell phone
or you've got a mobile phone and right
now there's no issues with it it pretty
much seems to get signal wherever i go
phone calls work
i'm paying a rate per month which i'm
quite happy with i'm not that bothered
by it you know it's a business expense
so if somebody phoned me up
and tried to convince me intellectually
i tell you what though we can double
your data we can give you extra roaming
we can cut your bill by 15 quid a month
i'd say yeah it's all well and good but
i
i i
i i can't be asked go through the hassle
of doing all of that because like i say
my phone works but we could save you
money but it's not the money mate i
don't want to go through the whole
[__] hassle of changing this and the
news
it's fine so you're never going to get
me
but you will get me and this is this
truly did happen to me one day i was
prospecting yeah and my phone cut out
twice on prospecting calls now you never
get back to somebody when you get cut
off
yeah
i was pissed off that afternoon some
chancer phoned up selling telecom
services right and because i was pissed
off about what had happened in the
morning and he said to me you know and
he started doing his thing and i said
all right i'll hear you out keep going
and he said we'll give you this we'll
give you that and i just said all right
but i'll tell you what i said i'm in
let's do it and you could hear the
excitement in his voice he couldn't
believe what he was hearing it's
probably
right
i can't believe this guy's got a bar
everyone said hey look before we go
forwards i can ask you a question
he goes yeah i said why am i buying from
you why have i agreed to do this do you
know
and he goes well because you know we're
going to double your data
we're going to save him i said no no no
i said i have no idea if the service
you're about to give me is going to be
any better i don't need the extra data
i'm going to take it because you've
offered it i i didn't even do you know
why i'm buying this because well i said
spite
i said because as of today
whoever it was it was getting my monthly
fee they ain't getting my money
you could be equally as crap i right now
i don't care i just don't want to give
these pricks my money anymore because
this morning i think they cost me money
so any other time they would have been
given short sharp shrift
but he got me
when i've been let down by whatever it
was that he sold and i i was emotional
pissed off annoying
so that's why
when you're prospecting you're going to
find that they're sitting there eating a
sandwich you've got to talk about what
you fix and then they suddenly say yo i
do recognize that oh you know we have
that as an issue or we've tried to fix
that then we can get them into a proper
conversation that's why it's important
because the journey has to start
emotionally if they just invite you in
out of intellectual curiosity you're
kissing a frog
yeah no one wants to do that so you
mentioned something interesting earlier
something i often talk about when we're
talking about websites and seos to
prospects yeah you don't want to drive a
ton of
prospects through the pipeline that
aren't actually a fit to do business
with you so like you said the purpose of
cold calling isn't to get everyone to
say yes and agree to a meeting because
that'll waste your time in theirs you're
just going to go through a qualification
initial meeting discovery and realize
that you're not a good fit for everyone
and just like with your website you
don't want to drive as many leads as
possible because not everyone might be
able to do business with you afford your
solution be a good fit whatever so with
that said
what are some quick best practices let's
say for the opener of your cold call um
i think everybody knows the one that i
i'm most um yeah yeah i just want to
hear it because i know a lot of people
disagree with it and i've seen a lot i
know a lot of people disagree yeah of
course they do because they disagree
with it because their mum won't let them
do it that's the real reason it's it's
not because it doesn't work it's their
mum says you can't say that
yeah and this is the thing i stopped
listening to my mum a long time ago i
love my mum i love my dad they gave me
great advice but when i realized that
they were costing me a fortune because i
was listening to all the rules they gave
me and a kid that don't apply as a
grown-up i realized how free i was so
the people that say they don't like it
it's because they don't know how to do
it or they've done it really badly and
it's bombed
um and it's like anything salesmen are
actors
something's coming right in bright sorry
folks it's just it's coming right it's
not i'm being ennobled or sainted or
anything it's uh it's just the sun
i could just see it but um
what was i saying yeah it's it's
so the opening line i use i've got
several that i like to use so i need to
change them and it all depends on you
know what i'm calling on but the one
that i prefer is and i again this works
predominantly
on decision makers
this works on people in the c-suite as
they say so
i don't phone anyone below director
level if you're phoning below director
level you're wasting your time yes
occasionally some managers have the
unilateral ability to spend money but
the word manage should tell you what
they do they don't make decisions it's a
phone at director level and the thing
about directors these are tough people
they're confident people they're
assertive people these are people that
make decisions for a living and they got
to the top because they made good
decisions sometimes they made bad
decisions and they learned from them so
they're decision makers they're
autonomous
and they're their own person and they
have a very strong sense of concept and
identity so when you phone someone up
like this
i want to deliberately poke them in a
way that's going to make them react
and if you phone up a decision-making
you tell them to do something their
reaction is no
you don't tell me what to do
it's the human condition we're
rebellious by nature we don't like to be
told what to do so when i phone up the
phone answers and i go hey is that sam
and you go yep you sam look you are
gonna hate me this is actually a cold
call so do you want to hang up or let me
have 30 seconds and when you say to
someone do you want to hang up the
reaction most of the time it's not 100
because you don't know what frame of
mind or what's going on in that person's
world when you phone them but most of
the time 95 of the time if you deliver
that well with assertiveness and
confidence at director level you often
get a bit of a chuckle
you know you get
[Laughter]
you know no no no go on then you know or
it depends what's it about yeah yes you
get permission they give you permission
to talk to them and then the other bit
after that is i don't say can i have or
please
is it okay i give them a command i say
let
me have it's a command so do you want to
hang up or let me have so i'm commanding
them with the second bit and it works on
a psychological level because the
instant reaction is no
don't want to hang up yeah and then let
me have 30 seconds and then you'll get
three answers they'll laugh haha quite
like that go on then some will say well
what's it about
which is kind of a weird thing to say
because you've just said can i have 30
seconds to explain what it's about so
it's it's it's
they don't know what to do here they're
called they want to say no but you're
gonna say
how much of this is because it's still
very unusual to hear this type of cold
call intro and how much of it is
weighted on the way you actually deliver
and you'll see the delivery is key if
you say um
i'll be up front this is um this is a
there's a cult call um
do you want to hang up or can i have 30
seconds
they're gonna think loser wimp remember
if you're talking at decision maker
level you gotta be like your prospect
you've gotta mirror them
and you have to sound like them and
that's very hard for most people in
sales because most people in sales are
young men and women in their twenties
maybe early 30s
they don't own two homes in a boat they
aren't technically successful by the
wider world standards and then you're
phoning someone who probably is
successful
so you don't act or sound like them you
have to learn to create that character i
had to learn it because i i wasn't like
that
so it's tiring to be a good actor
because every time you pick up that
phone you've got to become that same
character just for a few seconds and
then you can go into a different role so
yeah it's very important that you
deliver it well
yeah yeah and that makes sense and
because we want to we've got a few other
topics we've got to move through any
other quick quick pointers on the cold
calling terms if you mentioned earlier
you typically involve three common pain
points or problems that your customers
will typically have so yes is that the
next step or if we could just the
hardest thing for salesman to do is put
himself into his prospect's shoes and
see the world through their eyes so most
salespeople always talk in marketing
speak or solution speak
we help companies do xyz we have this
proprietary system that can do we
achieve blah blah blah
people tell us they have
but your prospects never thinking in
that language
so i can't phone up and say hi i'm a
sales trainer and i give people a
systematic psychological based approach
that will enable your sales people to
get out and he goes oh what's funny you
should say that cause i was just
thinking about that this morning
no
what is a guy that could use me probably
bitching or moaning about that i could
fix
and i know the number one thing i phone
any md or ceo go look you probably got
great guys but you're maybe a bit
frustrated that they're reluctant or not
motivated to pick up the phone and
prospect and they say to you
yes
i recognize that
that's what we're after we're after what
they see in their everyday life so
you've got to reduce it to that and
that's hard every client i get has to do
that exercise
and they struggle because they write
down what they fix no no no not what you
fix
write down what your prospect's viewing
in their everyday life that you fix
oh i don't know
so how can you phone someone up and
honestly so you understand them when you
can't even view their problem through
their eyes so that's a key takeaway and
if you get that right your prospecting
calls will work
so much better than the vomit you're
probably spewing on them now
yeah it informs your marketing a lot
we've done a lot of past episodes where
we've talked to marketers and basically
shared about how you can run customer
interviews so you interview your current
best customers find out the problems
they actually came to you with what they
wanted to fix find out the ones that are
most common the juiciest and the ones
that actually bring cash flow and then
use those in your sales material whether
that's in your calls your website
marketing material all that good stuff
so that makes sense um and
just to wrap this up are we
are we constantly pushing for the
meeting so if if we've had a problem
that they've said yeah that that
resonates and are we are we just looking
to dig deeper on that and eventually
close out with saying like can we set up
an appointment next tuesday no something
like that i i do not use the word can we
have a meeting or can we book in an
appointment
um i can't remember the last time i ever
asked anyone
for an appointment or a meeting
because the way i structure my calls
it's not possible the call ends i've
done my my questions to get them
slightly emotional because the last
question i ask is can i ask your last
question before you hang up they go have
you given up trying to fix this
now because i've done my job well 99 of
the time i get will know
and as soon as i get that that's it
that's the end of the prospecting go i
then go into with a very simple line i
go well look i'll be honest i don't know
if i can fix this for you
but i've worked with a lot of companies
with these problems and we've managed to
eliminate it for a lot of them not all
of them
but most of them
now let's pretend and like i say i'm not
saying i can but let's pretend we could
fix this for you and when you saw our
solution you genuinely believed it would
work is there any reason you wouldn't
invite me in to explore that further so
you asked to be invited in
yep i never asked for a meeting or an
appointment no no because that's
imposing myself on so is there any
reason you wouldn't invite me in to
explore that further
and they all say
no
not because it's hard to say no
it's really hard to say no to the way
that's phrased i don't know if i can fix
it for you but let's pretend you did
believe we could fix it is there any
reason you want to explore that further
no i can't see why not you know it's
almost impossible yeah i would actually
so they say no and as soon as i say that
i go straight in with another question
have you got your diary there
and then go yeah yeah i go what date
you're looking at now i give these mini
commands what date you're looking at
so never ask for a meeting never ask for
an appointment
it's almost the equivalent of saying to
somebody here pass me a wallet what
happens to you the moment says here pass
me your wallet there's that flinch
well
and all of a sudden the barrier goes up
that's what happens when you say well
look can we schedule an appointment all
of a sudden the prospect goes
uh
and then they half-heartedly
commit to it because they kind of feel
they have to for social niceties point
and then the moment they hang up they
think bollocks do that
a lot of this is in the small things it
sounds like from the tone of your voice
and using commanding words and phrasing
things in a certain way
can make quite a big difference selling
is the art of communication that is all
this is this is two human beings talking
and my job is to make someone
comfortable
if they're not comfortable they won't
move forwards with me sales people don't
realize how uncomfortable they make
people
yeah they are shockers and all you've
got to do is watch the apprentice which
is currently on tv if you want to see
how the world view sails people that's
it
so if you look sound or act like one of
them don't be surprised people think
you're a complete tool
no disrespect to anyone on the show
because i know it's purely but the tv
and they're probably asked to be
complete pricks but you get my point
good
good cool so that's cold calling in a
nutshell we've covered some kind of
basics of that so let's push it forward
let's go to the let's say we've set up a
next meeting and the times are now
that's most likely going to be a zoom
session perhaps is face to face if
you're local or if you're if in field
sales or whatever you do needs
face-to-face consulting
let's talk about this appointment let's
do it on the basis that we're selling
something where perhaps we have cold
cool we then set the appointment the
appointment is
let's say a fact-finding discovery
session to determine if we can actually
help this person with a project and
let's say it's a phase before we then go
into a demo or a presentation call right
let's see let's discovery session i i
call this the sales meeting people love
giving all these fancy terms
this is the sales meeting this is the
one meeting you've got to get right you
know you spent all those hours phoning
people you finally got through to
someone they finally said all right
maybe you got something let's have a
chat and then you go in and you ruin it
with some sort of fat finding discovery
call
no
this is the sale this is the moment that
you have to stand apart from everybody
else and act and behave in a manner that
makes them feel comfortable with you
so this to me is the most important
meeting and i think if you get this
right your sales cycle is drastically
reduced every client i've worked with
when they nail this first meeting you
suddenly go from having another two or
three after to maybe just one more
sometimes you can even close at the end
of that meeting to for the next step
so this is the crucial meeting and this
meeting
and this is why it's so important
and this is why salespeople will
struggle with this again we go back to
the concept most sales people work for
somebody
and they're working on behalf of
somebody so they always go in a
relatively servile
servitudel
mindset
yep and
you get in front of a prospect
and your mindset is as well i'm just so
grateful to be here i i you know it's
real thank you thank you so much for for
giving up your time so instantly you're
in this begging oliver twist bowl sort
of situation and so instantly instantly
you're putting you you haven't even
created a parrot equality here
so the mindset of a of a salesman is
very hard to develop
but if you watch the owner of a company
some some are very good but most people
at the top they're quite blase and how
they're approaching to come from this if
they know because it's my business i can
walk away i don't have to say yes to
this so they have a better self-concept
and self-awareness whereas people below
them don't
so
in this meeting
you need to
the mindset is very simple i'm not here
to demonstrate or convince to you why i
can help you
and the reason i'm doing that is because
i know what we do works we've got an
entire business dedicated to doing what
we do and it works so the problem isn't
i'm here to prove to you
that this works
i'm here to figure out if you're someone
that we should let buy from us
because that is the problem sales people
don't have they're always in there
trying to get some to want to like them
or convince them they need what they
have no no if you have problems we fix
if you accept you have problems we fix
and you can convince me you actually
want to fix them
then we're going to be able to help you
so i'm not here to prove to you that we
can help you
you need to convince me
that you're someone we should work with
and that mindset fundamentally change
how you act and behave now you're not
arrogant you're not a [__]
you do it in a way that makes people
comfortable but if you go into it with
that mindset i'm here to figure out if
we should work with you because there
are more reasons for you not to buy from
me than there are to buy from me we're
going to figure out if any of those
apply and if we can't get over them it's
over if we can get over them then we'll
move forward so that that that to me is
a fundamental thing you're there not to
convince anyone that they need you
i know what we do works the only thing
you have over me prospect is choice
you get to choose who you give your
money to but other than that
that's all you have your money i don't
need it we do well
we don't need your money we like your
money don't get me wrong but we don't
need your money
so that is the fundamental thing about
this meeting it's not about you
convincing them why they should move
forward it's getting them to convince
you that you should move forwards with
them
that mindset throws most people in sales
because yeah they can't do it it's just
not i can't do that no no no i've just
got to show up throw up and hope
yeah that's it i think
i'm not sure if this is always the case
but certainly when i started in sales i
thought if i could get that first
meeting then it was my chance to say i'm
so thankful for the meeting this is our
company history this is why we're so
great this is all the awards we've won
and this is why we're a great fit to
help you but in fact like you say what
you work out is if you've done sales for
more than a couple years not everyone's
a great fit to do to to work with you
some might not have the money some might
just be annoying and you don't want to
worry them some might not have like you
say have problems that you can fix
um and some might not believe you can
actually help them
and
so
in this meeting that we've secured that
we've kind of grinded away to get on the
books because they've got a problem or
problems that we can help with what are
some some best practices what are some
ways that we should perhaps start it
some some goals we should have in mind
and some ways that we can progress
right so the key to again the key to
success in all things in life not just
sales but
there's no attachment to the outcome i
cannot i cannot i cannot stress that no
and it's easy to say let's let's not
let's not bs each other it's very easy
to say these trite lines you know
yeah it's very easy yeah just have no
attachment to the occur that's easier
said than done how do you do that well
that's that's a lot of self-discipline
practice and technique you can't just
will you can't will yourself thin
yeah just have a good mind to yeah just
every day say i'm thin i'm thin i'm
beautiful i'm thin i'm thin are you
putting a fork down and going to the gym
well no well then you're going to be fat
for the rest of your life yeah
so so it's very easy to say think
yourself then and all that crap so
you've got to start behaving differently
and the first thing you need to do is no
attachment to the outcome so when i get
in front of a prospect i go in there not
with the intention of selling
because i'm not there to sell i'm there
to figure out if i can move forwards
with this person which means there are
certain things i need to understand so
i'm only interested in getting the
information from them that i need to
determine if i can move forwards with
them and if they can move forwards with
me so the outcomes are relevant just
like a lawyer
day one of the trial you know what's the
outcome
well the outcome is for me to do the
absolute best job that i can whatever
the jury decides i have no idea what
juries do yeah when they go out there
they do their own thing all i do know is
from experience that if i do all these
things really really well statistically
there's a good chance that we'll get an
acquittal or we'll get
the verdict that we want but it's not
guaranteed
but
the only time you can hold me up against
the wall and say i failed is if we look
at what i did and i did it wrong if i
was negligent or incompetent in how we
got to the outcome we didn't want then
you have right to come at me but if i
did everything right but we still got an
outcome we didn't want well that's not
my fault it just wasn't meant to be and
some people don't get that they seem to
think that everyone should want to buy
from them
no you're going in it with the wrong
monthly so you need to
first of all no attachment to the
outcome the purpose of this meeting is
for us to figure out can you convince me
you want to fix your problem so i look
for five things do you have a problem
i can fix so i need to figure that out
second do they acknowledge and accept
they have the problem
okay
thirdly can they convince you they want
to fix it now those three are the
emotional bits and those three are the
important bits because you can meet
people that recognize they have a
problem
but they don't want to fix it
and it doesn't matter how logically
brilliant no matter how much money you
can save them and how much better you
can make that if they don't actually
care or there's no reason to fix it
then they won't and salespeople miss
that
and they come away i don't get it we
could have done so much for them we
could have done all this i just don't
understand we well you didn't sell the
value no you did they just didn't care
so they if they can't convince you they
want to fix that problem it will go
nowhere so you've got to get those three
things a couple of things on that before
we jump into the final two of the five
so how do we so you said you don't like
calling your discovery call which is
fine you call it whatever the heck you
want call it a sales meeting but how do
we position this so
prospects don't feel like we're running
a q a we're not going through our
company's qualification sheet rolling
off 20 questions that identify whether
this prospect is a good fit to become a
customer or not and how do we position
these qualification questions around
their problems them acknowledging they
have a problem that we can fix and
progressing them across the sales cycle
without them feeling that we're doing
so well that's an entire training course
yeah yeah yeah an entire training or
you've just i mean that's the that's
that's the
two veg of the entire thing right so i'm
not going to be able to do it justice in
a few minutes but the the fact of the
matter is again it's easy to say these
things it's harder to do them it has to
be a conversation again that's a very
trite thing to say the problem is as
most salespeople have questions designed
to elicit intellectual answers and
design to gather information that enable
them to talk about them or their product
that's why they're bad and they ask
questions in a manner that can come
across as a cross-examination most
salespeople most human beings it's not
just limited to sales people most human
beings are terrible at asking questions
because we ask what's on our mind
without filtering it
and without thinking how is this going
to be received by the other person
and
you've all been in a situation a
business or a personal situation where
you've said something and then the other
person says something back to you and
then you found yourself yeah but that's
not what i meant
well whose fault is that it's not the
person's fault because obviously how you
communicated what you meant to
communicate you clearly didn't
communicate it
so
selling is about the art of
communicating so when you ask questions
first of all you have to ask relevant
questions that are designed to move
people to emotion
and those questions aren't intellectual
ones so talk me through your current
processes
no
that's that's a that's a pointless
mind-numbingly stupid it has a place but
not at the beginning not in the not at
the sound meeting it'll come out
what you want to do is ask questions
designed i call it the pub conversation
could you imagine if you're a you're
you're a salesman that's old legal
services right and you're at the pub
with the may
and he says i'm thinking about getting a
divorce
a typical salesman i'm a good divorce
lawyer
you know that's that's what the salesman
would do you know i know a good divorce
but if you were just a mate that wasn't
selling legal services and your friend
said to you i'm thinking about getting a
divorce
you look at him you go why
wha wha what what do you what do you
mean and then the guy has to explain to
you well you know things haven't been
going so well for the last few months
what do you mean they haven't been going
so well what's been going on
any uh and he's he's genuinely curious
and trying to understand what is going
on he's oh no good lawyer no good lawyer
no no that's what the salesman did oh
yeah okay and how long were you married
oh yeah six years do you guys own any
assets together that's what the crappy
cells are but the mate is saying well
have you considered if you considered
counselling
oh yeah what about just taking some time
out you know maybe maybe a quick he's
giving all the alternatives to divorce
but the sales guy i know a good lawyer i
know a good lie you know and it's so
it's it's it's it's getting them to
appreciate that the conversation you
have with the prospect
has to be conversational it has to be
one where i'm exploring and trying to
find out what the hell is going on here
you've invited me in
let's find out if there really is
something here now people think because
they're sitting opposite a guy who earns
120k yeah he's got a 3 000 pound suit on
and he looks serious that you can't talk
to him like a human being
you can because underneath that 3 000
pound suit is a guy that has the same
weaknesses fears looks in the mirror
says god i'm getting old i need to lose
a bit of weight
same same same same but you don't see
that you just see ceo successful
business
i better be able to answer his questions
i better come across as intelligent and
smart
and you don't
that so that's that that the number of
this meeting is getting to the heart of
what's going on and you can't do that if
you've just got a series of intellectual
questions or really lame question what
keeps you up at night sir oh my goodness
i mean too many bears at the pub
yeah it's just it's terrible
anyway yeah yeah
genuine genuine curiosity um
curiosity
i think
what i find anyways if i speak to a
sales rep and they're asking actually
asking me those kind of questions it
differentiates them quite a lot um
because like you say most people just
want to throw up and show up and try and
shove this product or service down your
neck before you can even kind of string
a sentence together so if someone's
actually showing interest in
what your current position is what your
current state is why you've even thought
about that why aren't you trying to fix
it yourself why haven't you tried a
similar solution and why you've gone
through xyz and what's brought you to
this moment
and they're actually thinking this
person actually cares about helping me
rather than just trying to shove their
product down my neck
yeah
i just want to get to the truth because
the truth will help me determine if
you're suitable for our stuff mm-hmm um
because it's like i said most
salespeople are like air hostesses
without the drinks
you know they got that forced smile and
oh yeah
they just go along with no matter what
they just got to be polite and simple
that's what sales people are like you
know they're deferencing themselves to
their prospect whereas i'm sitting in
there and i'll talk to them like i've
known them for 20 years that won't be
overly familiar because i might all are
you know nothing like that but and i can
talk to them on a human level i don't
understand when you say you're thinking
about getting sales training what do you
mean by thinking because this is also
people say to me how are you good at
asking questions i don't have a list of
pre-scripted questions that i ask
all my questions are based on everything
the prospects saying and it's often i
listen to their words because remember
this is all about communications the
higher up you go the smarter you go they
use words for particular reasons so i
challenge anything
that sounds opaque so somebody says to
me well we've been thinking about
getting sales training i go well when
you say thinking what do you mean
because what does that mean we've just
come up with the idea this morning we've
actually been talking to other sales
trainers uh what does thinking mean so
then they say well when i say thinking
it's been a conversation we've been
having over the last few months why have
you been having that conversation well
we've noticed a dip in ourselves or
what's changed
in the last few months for the dip to
happen well that's it we don't know when
you asked your sales guys why are they
not performing what did they say well
i've not asked them that why did you not
ask them that so this is how they so
every question i ask is predicated on
what they've said
that's why people don't get upset or
that's why people don't stop me asking
questions because i'm not
cross-examining them
i'm actually just responding to what
they've said
yeah yeah that skill and that's a very
hard skill to master because to get good
at it you've got to have a lot of
terrible terrible sales meetings
and i have
okay getting to the heart of the issue
how i guess two two ways to
almost wrap this up before you talk
about the last five points how what
happens if you've had a bit of a chat
you've gone through some of these points
you've dug a bit deeper and you realize
that this prospect is not someone that
you can help how should we close that
out and on the flip side
how do we then if we think we can help
them convince or how do we
tell them to tell us that they believe
that we can help them no well two well
if you get to the end of it and you
conclude you can't help them it's easy
you just tell them i'll be honest i
can't help you
do you know the reaction you get you
know how hard it is to get people not to
work with you when you tell them you
can't work with them it
blows my mind i can't help you because
if they look at you like a child it's
like why
you go well
look
it's because and then you give them your
and some will say yeah yeah but we can
overco they'll actually start fighting
with you
but if you really don't want to work
with them you just plant your feet now
the other scenario
you want to work with them you know you
can help them
now i would have done a lot of stuff at
the beginning see salespeople leave the
hard stuff normally to the end
i've already got them to agree at the
beginning of the meeting that what
happens next is what happens next that's
very important to do we haven't
discussed it and we won't so when i get
to the end of the meeting
i never ask for anything all i say i
wrap up all my meetings the same way and
i know when i've got to the point
because i've been doing this long enough
and i know my prospects and i know my
world inside out
and when i get to the end when i get to
the point where i know it's appropriate
oh look at my watch i don't wear a watch
it's all acting you sort of look at your
wrist
because that's the motion for time
because body language is what we read so
i go look you know what i'm conscious of
time we've been doing this for about
just over an hour now look we're going
to have to wrap this up can i ask you a
question
sure
based on the questions i've asked and
the answers i've given you during this
meeting
do you believe i can help you
that's it now if the answer is
no or i don't know i've screwed up and i
know i've screwed up and it's probably
too late to rectify so then for me
personally i will leave that meeting and
go back over it in my head and go
where did i go wrong what did i not do
and i'll fix it
but if they say yes
i go do you mind if i ask why
and then they all say the same thing
well
i've enjoyed our conversation it's quite
obvious you understand
our problems
uh i i can see that you've got
experience i think my guys are gonna
like you i like the way you do things i
mean i yeah i just i just yeah i just do
believe you can help me like okay so
what do you want to do
and they go well you said at the
beginning the next step would be we do
da da da da go okay do you want to do
that
uh yeah
so i never asked for the order just like
i never asked for an appointment
if i've done my job well all i do is do
you believe i can help you yes then
there should be no reason why we can't
move forwards
yeah it's not easy but getting there you
can't just do that you can't do a really
shite job and then do that it won't work
it's all about how you get to the ending
it's not whether or not you get there
it's how you get there just like a
professional sportsman they're not
focused on the end they're focused on
every stroke of every bit of that race
making sure they're doing it absolutely
perfectly that's all they're focused on
and if they do all of those right in a
row they should win
but they might not because the other
guy's better at the strokes damn it
that's how it works
yeah so with that said i mean up to i
guess to just reinforce what you said
about that i'm guessing you're talking
about some kind of upfront contract
where you say at the start of the
presentation that this can go kind of
one or two or three ways yeah that's a
rather dated term yeah but yeah you need
some sort of agreement at the beginning
as to what will happen next and you have
to lock it in um i've seen these sorts
of things that a lot of people do very
weak wishy-washy things you know what
we'll do is we'll set aside a few
minutes at the end and we'll agree a
next step the problem is is if you don't
define the next step right at the
beginning when you get to the end and
you tell them it they're still able to
say no i don't like it i don't want to
do that as a next step then you've just
spent 45 minutes talking to someone for
a next step that could never take place
so most people do very weak ones because
they're scared and this is why you don't
want to tell them what the next step is
if you tell them what the next step is
early on and they say i don't want to do
that
your fear is oh but i won't get to spend
45 minutes trying to convince them they
should
so you don't do it
so i make it clear
i say to them and if we can't agree
we'll set aside a few minutes at the end
and we'll set aside a next step sound
fair and they all go yeah yeah i'm fair
with that i go okay fair enough oh
actually one last thing
i've only got one next step in my world
shall i tell you what it is nobody ever
says nah let's leave it as a surprise
they also
uh yeah okay and then i tell them and
this is a mini sales pitch because i'm
selling because my next steps always
paid
so there's a figure attached to this so
this is where you learn to sell quotes
and proposals the next step is this and
it's going to cost you two and a half k
so knowing that if we don't say no to
each other the next step
is gonna be an investment of two and a
half k do you still want to have this
meaning
and you'll get stumbled no there's no
way in god's green earth that i'm fine
so what were you expecting was going to
happen by the end of this meeting well i
just assumed you're going to come and
tell me how to fix my problem for free
yeah i know i'm not
now i'm willing to walk at that point
but just to all those listening to the
sake ah that won't work
i've only once in my entire life doing
this had somebody literally outright
said there's no way i'd pay that
everyone has said they can lie to me
they'll always say no no no no no no i'm
i'm comfortable i knew this was going to
cost money i didn't think anything would
be free and you'll be amazed at
prospects how many will say that the
fear is that they won't but i've had
clients phone me up i had one sold tech
and i told them how not to do demos we
eliminated demos demos are pointless
and
he sold proposals scoping documents
it took six months to pluck up the
courage then he phoned me up and he said
i did it i sold one i go what did you
get he goes five grand
i could get out of here i go what's the
biggest takeaway you took from the
experience he goes well the thing is it
was his reaction
i go what do you mean so i did
everything you said i structured it the
way you said and then i said to him and
and that's going to cost you 5k
i got a hand he he just looked at me and
said
seems reasonable
and he goes why have i never done this
because you're too chicken [__] to ask
because you were always told
you've got to do stuff for free to be
you got to build a relationship
it might even start at a higher level
right because i actually started doing
similar after one of our calls two years
ago
specific projects i sell proposals or
assessment documents yeah and it also
filters out the time wasters so if
someone's willing to invest in that
we might sell them a larger project and
discount the price of the assessment off
the end and project with that in mind so
it certainly does work i've sold it
it weeds out time wasters but this is it
sales people don't care about time
wasters as long as they can stick
something in their pipeline that has a
65 chance of closing it means they don't
have to prospect and they get to live on
hope and hope is the currency
of crap salesman
yeah and it might be a problem with
leadership as well especially if you've
got kpis like ship this many proposals
you'll get out this many quotes and it's
like if you've got that pressure above
your head and it's almost
counterintuitive so some
for some instances well most sales
managers were good order takers that
didn't want to take orders anymore
yeah
exactly we know that right
indeed so we we we progress i mean that
to what we've just covered there covers
a good chunk of what you should be doing
on a demo really doesn't it um
independently i'd never use it with demo
oh no no don't what is a demo you might
as well take your holiday photos and
show somebody those that's the
equivalent of a demo it's the commercial
version of your holiday snaps
yeah and people say well we've got to do
demos what you do if you tell someone
can we phone you and do a demo
stop doing it no the next step would be
for us to figure out whether or not we
can move forward during that process we
may be able to show you some of the
system to to feed off but we may not get
there
that's what you need to start doing but
if you say can we have i saw some guy on
a youtube channel saying uh he asked for
18 minutes so that they can do a demo to
prove to you so what the what
would they go away you know
18 minutes for me to talk at you about
why i'm so brilliant that's why i love
sales people they're forward thinkers
they created instagram long before it
existed you see sales meaning instagram
for sales folk yeah it's just we get to
be narcissistic and self-loving
yeah instagram just uh gave it to the
world
so do you think i mean this would this
would very very massively depending on
the
i guess the sales cycle of the product
perhaps piece of tech whatever it is
you're selling do you think that we
should try and link that all into that
one call there
so
what are you saying
there are there are challenges i mean
yeah you've got enterprise sales and
obviously enterprise sales are selling
massive bits of this variety of
different stakeholders that have to be
involved and obviously that's not a one
or two call close
but the the primary function of a
salesman is to always be in control
and you have to design and start so
every meeting can always end with a
clearly agreed next step and
consequences if nothing happens
the problem is owls people are scared to
get commitments from from from prospect
they're scared that if they ask them for
a commitment that the the prospect will
walk
and i would rather they walk than be
strung along
for six months only to get to the end to
realize that the ceo hadn't even been
told that this project was being
considered and the moment he heard about
it he said no
yeah yeah yeah so i want to wrap this
this episode to there with two things
follow-ups
and
knowing when to walk away from a
prospect potential customer the two
might be linked
so
i mean based on what if you're following
up with someone you've met
yeah let's say a sales follow-up so
perhaps let's give the instance that
maybe we
maybe we cocked up let's say let's say
we we had a we we've arranged a meeting
we've gone through it
or maybe we got strung along um maybe we
did a meeting one of the founders of the
company was there it all went well we
identified they had a problem we could
fix um they agreed that we we did we
shared pricing we shared all the good
stuff what the next steps are they said
that all sounds great but i need to
speak to my co-founder and then they go
let's reconnect next week yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah crickets silence hey bells are
going through you're crying because that
was the 10 grand you needed to hit
quaker
okay so this is what you got to do it
again this takes courage to do because
you're going to be scared to do it and
your mum's going to be saying you can't
say that you can't ask these questions
well you can
because i do it all the time and no one
ever gets upset
because i always operate in the world of
reality and logic so if that should
happen to me it doesn't happen much but
if if i get to the point where they
actually say they actually get to the
point and they say uh you know what
benjamin i i don't want to give a no but
i don't want to give a yes
i honestly this is not a fob off they do
all this drama and acting around this
right it's not a fob off benjamin
um i i do need to go and blah blah blah
blah blah i go fair enough okay so why
don't we agree this
why don't you reach out to me next week
and they go fine i go okay so what day
can i expect to hear from you by next
week
and they go you'll hear from me by
friday i go what time friday
and they go end of play i goes at four
five o'clock five o'clock okay so let's
agree this thing if i haven't heard from
you at five o'clock by friday what do i
do do i chase you or just assume it's
over
they all say
oh chase me
i go fair enough how many times
i know just once you just have to do it
at the right they go but i promise you i
will get back to you now
i don't believe prospects are lying to
you at that moment when they say i
promise i'll get back to you because i
do believe in the moment they actually
genuinely mean it the reality is though
once they leave and they get caught up
in their world and their lives and
everything going on
you are the last person and because
you're a salesman you don't have to keep
a commitment to a salesman so you just
literally i call salesmen are poo sticks
for those of you watching don't know
what a poo stick is
a pooch that you would have done this as
a child you know you stand on a bridge
with a stick and you throw the stick in
and then you run to the other side and
you race it
well we're poo sticks because once we
leave they just chuck us into that river
and we just drift off into endless time
right
never to be thought of again
so i say how many times and i go no i
promise you i go no i appreciate that i
go can i be up front with you
i know the whirlwind of life can take
over and you may genuinely not get back
to me so why don't we agree this if i
don't hear from you i'll phone you if i
get you you can give me your answer if i
don't get you i'll leave you a message
and it's up to you to call me back and
if you don't call me back
i'll just assume it's over how does that
sound no yeah yeah that's fine i'm fine
with it so i now know come five o'clock
friday if i haven't heard from them i
just make my call i get their voicemail
say hey sam it's benjamin just as agreed
didn't get your call this is the message
if you still want to move this forward
reach out but otherwise i'm going to
assume you've managed to fix your
problem all the best buy
that two things happen you never hear
from them or they phone you back
yep so essentially what we're saying is
we agree
we really drill down because that is
something you hear in sales so much
isn't it yeah
no matter what it is says there's
oftentimes even if you've said even if
you asked like who's involved in the
process every now and then surprises do
come along or people that perhaps share
all the information that you needed like
you said they might say we need to get
someone else involved or we're actually
speaking to another vendor and we'll let
you know next friday so what you're
saying is really drill down and say well
what time next friday
there's an irony with sales people
because they'll spend 30 minutes trying
to convince you to use them but the one
moment they need to have a pair of balls
and actually be a little bit pushy is
the bit we've just done and then they
wimp out because
the little kids i don't know what except
them i think it's gone really well i
don't don't want to scare them off no
this is the moment look buddy might i'm
not saying this so just for the record
this is what i'm thinking look buddy my
time's just as important if you don't
want to tell me no i'm just going to by
default assume it's a no and i know you
don't have to tell me no because i'm a
salesman and you owe me nothing once
this meeting is over i know that so
unless we agree you owe me something and
the consequences of not going through
with it
then i can't blame you for being treated
like crap if you get treated like crap
as a salesman it's your fault because
you let it happen
stop letting it happen
grow a pair
yeah yeah translation i don't know what
it is
okay we'll get into that just now but um
with that said does that mean we need to
have
completely ditched because we're getting
that agreement on whether they'll um on
what time we should call back if they
don't respond to the call if they don't
answer it we're basically saying look
we're we're gonna close your account
that's it as far as we concerned unless
you get back to me or unless you answer
that call does that mean there's no need
for email follow-up have you been eaten
by an alien have you given up on this
project
so again again
i'm not a complete numpty because you
see
i'll tell you a true story and this is
this is because life is funny you don't
know what happens to a human being once
you've left and i i had that happen um
the guy said look leave it with me i'll
be in touch next week he didn't get in
touch i i did what i agreed
okay and i heard nothing
okay
right
so
about three weeks later i always do a
nice block hey brian i never did get
that call i can only assume you can
manage to solve this problem elsewhere
i'm going to close the file on this now
for good
but i wish you every success
and this guy got back to me
and he said ben's been really really
really very sorry um
i've actually been out of action for the
last couple of months i was in an
accident that involved the death of a
child
bloody hell
you know and it's like you see
so i ca that's why i never get angry
with prospects if they don't get back
because you have no idea what's going on
in their life you have no right to get
angry with them but if you agreed with
them that you're going to end it if you
don't hear from them then you walk away
follow up in a few weeks with a look i
haven't heard from you obviously you've
managed to fix your problem i'm going to
close the file on this and again if you
send that close the file it's a lovely
little phrase
they're gonna close the file on this you
get two responses again you get nothing
which means it's definitely dead
or you get someone come back say no no
no no look sorry i i honestly we've just
had we've just been investigated by hmrc
and everything's been put on hold for
the last six weeks stuff happens so no i
don't say you just stick two fingers up
go screw yourself sir and then walk off
you know don't be a dick but what i'm
saying is this is about you not being a
needy biggie pleading desperate
just touching base to see how you oh god
go away just in the neighborhood no you
weren't you made a hour detour to pass
my office
yeah yeah so
it's essentially what you're saying is
get that agreement on the call when you
will call back and what you will do next
perhaps give it a few weeks
drop an email like that stop an email
i'm gonna click
yeah yeah if not leave it what what are
your thoughts just to wrap up on the
chris chris voss email i don't know if
you've heard it where you basically just
no no well i i read his book but what's
the chris voss email is it right
yeah well i don't i don't think it's new
he does talk about in his book and josh
broad and him have talked about it as
well you basically put i think their
subject line is just their name and then
you you literally put like steve have
you given up on i don't know trying to
increase leads from your website
whatever that problem
that's it that's literally the email
have you given up on problem we
discussed
well it's i i suppose what i say is in a
similar fashion just slightly different
it's prompting the same reaction from
them it's to get them to say no in their
head
that's all you're doing so i said look i
get the i get the i'm going to close the
file on this by saying that this voice
oh no no don't do that
yeah same thing you're just trying to
get them to say no it's all about going
going for no and there are books written
in fact there's a book called going for
no
it's a very easy thing to say
but most people don't do it and this is
this is why i love sales people they
love reading books they just don't do
anything in
them yeah yeah awesome well i think
we've wrapped up quite nicely is there
anything else that you want to finalize
on benjamin we
cover pretty much everything
the simple rule is this you're your own
worst enemy in
south and you need to figure out why
you're doing what you're doing why do
you feel a certain way when a prospect
says or does something why do you let
things keep happening to you
yeah
uh it's it's it's not the prospect's
fault prospects can't fail at being
prospects
there's no way they can behave that is
off the charts that is beyond the power
they're allowed to behave and the fact
that it should ever surprise or shock
you means you lack any sense of ability
to learn
from your experiences as there is
nothing a prospect can say or do that
should ever shock you it's predictable
you could write it on a piece of paper
very rarely so if anything's happening
to you it's your fault to stop blaming
the lead stop blaming the data stop
blaming the recession or covered or
brexit look in the mirror and say why am
i so [__] at selling
and then figure it out and then change
there you go benjamin always a pleasure
never a chore sir thanks for coming back
i think you're the first person to be on
four times i believe it is three or four
what did you say four times i think
you've been on four times
it's three or four so that that's that's
the first milestone for that so congrats
and with that said sir please do tell us
more about how everyone tuning in can
learn from you connect with you and
anything you want to promote oh yes so
easy to find me on linkedin that's where
i pretty much hang out most of the time
um my website uh uk's with an s uk's
most hated sales trainer dot com um and
i'm running a couple of boot camps next
month they're currently just over half
full got a questioning strategies boot
camp and we touched on a bit of that
today i've also got a telephone
prospecting boot camp they're also on
the website um and if you've watched to
the end and if you decide you want to do
one of my boot camps if you enter the
word dumming d-u-n-n
dunning it's the sam dunning discount if
you put that in at the um checkout i'll
give you
i don't know 150 quid off whichever boot
camp you book on but these are for the
march one so dumming
d-u-n-n-i-n-g
in the um check out where it says apply
your code
but if you don't
tough got to pay the full right there
you go it's a deal still it's the
bargain of the century
benjamin thanks once again we'll put all
those we'll put a link to your website
over in the show notes at
businessgrowth.marketing with that i
want to thank you once again sir thank
you for having me on it's been a
pleasure sam no worries and as always if
you enjoyed the show be sure to hit
subscribe if you're on youtube or give
us a quick rating on the podcast
channels we interview business leaders
each and every week and we share
actionable marketing tips to grow your
business grow your revenue and with that
we should catch you on the next one
cheers goodbye